---
layout: post
title:  "On Authenticity"
date:   2017-02-14
---

I've been pondering the idea of authenticity. I started thinking about
the concept after listening to [Noah Kagan's podcast with Jason
Fried](http://okdork.com/jason-fried-robots-watches-and-not-sweating/).
Jason, a lover of cars, was asked about his favorite cars. He
answered Aston Martin, and one of the reasons he gave was Aston's
dedication to what he called authenticity of materials - if it looks
like wood, it is wood; if it looks like metal, it is metal. In contrast,
in many cars, even high-end cars, chrome elements are really
chrome-plated plastic; woodgrain is veneer. Jason talked briefly about
the cost of this authenticity of materials. The cars still need to be
largely handmade, and of course are rather expensive. 

More generally, this is an example of what I'd call *authenticity of
design.* Authenticity of this type is imbued in a made thing by the
creator, and the creator's dedication to authenticity is what prompts
it. Therefore, authenticity of design is externalized. Beyond
authenticity of materials,
[skeuomorphs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skeuomorph) - design elements that evoke
other made objects of a different type - are an example of
inauthenticity of design; [affordances](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Affordance)
- if it looks like you interact
with something, you can - are an example of authenticity of design.

A week or so later, I was listening to another podcast, [The Tim Ferriss
show with Adam
Robinson](http://tim.blog/2017/02/02/lessons-from-warren-buffett-bobby-fischer-and-other-outliers/).
Adam and Tim discussed battling depression,
and Adam explained that one of the breakthroughs that helped him emerge
from depression was also one of authenticity - his authenticity of
self-image. In my own words, the idea is that we are often so focused on
selling ourselves, on creating an image of ourselves, that we embrace
that image regardless of how well it reflects who we really are. This
creates an internal conflict, because if we believe in a false image of
ourselves - an inauthentic image - we compare our real actions and
feelings to it and find ourselves lacking. This discord likely affects
people differently, but I imagine one of those ways is depression and
self-loathing. 

I'd characterize this type of authenticity as *authenticity of self.*
Authenticity of this type is both representative and the creation of the
same maker - it is about one's own representation of one's self. In this
way, it is internal authenticity, in contrast to the external
authenticity of design. I'll discuss some more examples of this type of
authenticity below.

One thing I find interesting about both of these types of authenticity
is that they are both of *intrinsic* value, sometimes to the detriment
of extrinsic economic interests. By that I mean that often the world
around us often rewards inauthenticity. As a result, efforts to remain
authentic must be motivated by an intrinsic force, an assignment of
value to authenticity itself. As I write this, I feel like there is an
almost moral overtone to the entire concept, though I don't feel like
authenticity (or its lack) is really related to ethics, which are about
our relationship with those around us. Instead, I feel like authenticity
is kind of like an inward-facing morality.

Since hearing the discussions above and thinking about them for a while,
I've come to see authenticity, and the struggle for authenticity,
everywhere, and particularly in business. Companies often market
themselves as something they aren't truly. Tech companies in particular
often like to pretend that their work is wildly innovative and
groundbreaking, and that they are leading the charge in some new
direction. In reality, many of those companies, particularly larger
companies, do very little innovation. Instead, they provide relatively
reliable if somewhat prosaic software with great account involvement and
great support. These benefits are super valuable, so why the
inauthenticity? In my opinion, it costs these companies quite a lot,
both in terms of dollars to maintain this facade, and in terms of a
deeper conflict in the organization itself - akin to the internal
conflict we feel when we are inauthentic with our image of ourself. This
conflict manifests in disjointed strategy and wasted efforts as the
business units, products, and employees seek to find relevance within
the image the company presents for itself. On the other hand, the
benefits are dubious at best - who is being fooled? Surely not the
customers, at least the ones you can retain.

I think companies should seek to be authentic in their marketing. If it
looks like wood, it is wood; if it looks like metal, it is metal; if you
say you're innovative, you are; if you say you support your products
rabidly, you do. Instead of presenting your company as something you
aren't, present it as what you *actually are*. If you want to *be*
something else, become it (or a least invest in becoming it) before you
start saying it. Incidentally, this is just as true for individuals as
it is for companies. Say what you are, and be who you say you are. 

Unfortunately, as I said above I think the value of authenticity is
first an intrinsic one. This means that companies in particular, but
also individuals to some extent, are often incentivized to operate
outside of authenticity. Authenticity costs something as well, and that
cost combined with the frequent external reward for inauthenticity make
it hard to stay the course. However, I think the rewards are much more
long-lasting than the external rewards. These rewards are both internal
and external. 

Externally, authenticity is often reward by rabid enthusiasm from
others, as in the case of Aston with Jason Fried. People tend to admire
these products, want to talk about them, want to show them to others. I
think a lot of the recent popularity in buying higher quality products
(selvedge denim, or Darn Tough socks, for example) is a reflection of
the market desire for authenticity, and possibly even a backlash against
inauthenticity. For companies where metrics like net promoter scores are
beginning to take such an important position, this kind of reward can
recommend authenticity over the more fleeting reward for inauthenticity.

Beyond external rewards, maintaining an authentic image promotes an
inner harmony of sorts. I think this is what Adam Robinson was referring
to, and I think it extends beyond just ourselves to our organizations at
large. In many companies, a mission statement serves as a good starting
point, but I think it's important for the *entire company* to reflect
the authentic value of the company internal as well as externally - from
leadership to HR to PR to marketing to sales to engineering to
operations. When everyone in the company is aligned, and everyone is
saying the same thing, and the thing they are saying is an honest
description of what the company is, every action that is taken is
on-mission. Without that, a mission statement is as divorced from
reality as the marketing. When a company devotes itself to authenticity,
nothing is a lie and nothing is pretense.
