---
layout: post
title: "The High Cost of Cheap Food"
date: 2018-02-10
---
After nearly a month of [self-imposed dietary
restriction](https://whole30.com/whole30-program-rules/), I've come to a
conclusion. In order to build a healthy relationship with food, we need
to recognize it for what it is: beyond being a necessity, food is often
an indulgence. By accepting and internalizing that fact, we can rebuild
the way we eat to produce the outcomes we really want - fitter
appearance and better health.

## Indulgences
Every luxury comes with a price tag, whether monetary or not. That price
tag is often the only criterion used to evaluate the transaction. You
see something you want, you check your bank account, find you can afford
it, and buy it. Great right? Unfortunately, with every transaction comes
second-order effects, indirect costs that can be difficult to evaluate,
even if we already know about them. 

That new pair of shoes costs you [hours of your
life](http://amzn.to/2EBUY6I). The shiny new car [extends your working
years](https://www.nerdwallet.com/blog/loans/total-cost-owning-car/),
pushing retirement further into the future. The mortgage on the big
house puts you and your family closer to subsistence, making it harder
to recover from a loss of your job or any other financial setback. When
evaluating these types of transactions, we tend to focus on the outcome
(you, behind the wheel of the new car, turning every head in town) and
the immediate cost (whew, $40,000 seems pricey, but if i finance it...),
while ignoring these second order effects.

I'd argue that this is the *definition* of an indulgence: something we
crave, but that comes at a disproportionate cost to our future selves,
or those around us, or the environment, or anything else - again,
monetary cost and impact is just an easy example.

## Food as indulgence
In the context of this definition, food's inclusion in the category of
indulgences is clear. The essence is well captured by the saying "once
on the lips, forever on the hips": the second order effect of our lax
dietary choices is obesity, metabolic disorder, heart disease, and
everything else we already know about.

Food is unique in one way, though, and I think the distinction is what
makes unhealthy eating so commonplace in America: **food has almost no
upfront cost at all**. Soda, cookies, candy, fast food - these things
are all abundantly available at a price point that boggles. [Double Stuf
Oreos](https://www.amazon.com/Oreo-Double-Chocolate-Sandwich-Cookies/dp/B0062Q5W54),
one my sweet tooth's favorites, clock in at a whopping 4200 calories per
bag, with each bag costing under $3! For what is effectively pocket
change, you can eat a phenomenally delicious taste explosion that
contains roughly **twice** a full day's healthy calorie intake. I think
this is part of the reason you see Hardee's and other fast food joints
crammed with contractors and other laborers: after a morning of physical
labor, you want the dopamine rush from eating delicious foods, and they
are available at a price even the poorest among us can manage.

Coupled with the gradual onset of the second-order effects of a bad
diet, these low prices put any and all food within reach of most
Americans. The outcomes we're seeing are stark: [adult obesity rates
over 65% and increasing, with worsening rates among children as
well](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Obesity_in_the_United_States#/media/File:USObesityRate1960-2004.svg).
Perhaps worse, data suggests that poverty and obesity are closely
related. Put another way, the people who will suffer the worst impact
from the second-order effects of a bad diet are the most susceptible.
For the most impoverished among us, life is largely devoid of luxury and
food offers a beacon of comfort, perhaps the only one within reach. This
thesis offers some insight into why [the relationship between poverty
and obesity might be
causative](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3198075/); the
psychological toll of being poor itself may encourage worse eating
habits.

Though they may get the worst of it, it's not only the poor. The phrase
"comfort food" perfectly captures the idea. When you're sick, or sad, or
generally feel down, food offers a portal back into happiness and
luxury. Though the focus thus far has been primarily focused on the way
our relationship to food may be tied to widespread obesity, the very
same concepts are what make food universally amazing beyond its prosaic
position as a requirement to sustain life. This is precisely why we need
to become more mindful of the relationship, though. If we let our [fast
thinking](http://amzn.to/2EvudmW) make the decision for us, we end up
ignoring the knock-on effects. Beyond combating bad diet habits, an
intentional relationship with food can make the joys of food that much
better.
