---
layout: post
title:  "Brief Bio"
date:   2012-01-01
---

I am currently the VP of Product at [Mobile System
7](http://mobilesystem7.com), where I work with customers, sales,
engineering, and business leadership to design and build Interlock, the
most powerful and comprehensive Identity Analytics and Adaptive Access
Control platform in the world. I gather requirements, prioritize
development resources, help structure marketing, and work with the sales team to
improve our processes and our product. I also lend a hand with
development.

Previously, I co-founded and led the technical side of
[MiserWare](http://www.crunchbase.com/organization/miserware) from 2007
until 2013. At MiserWare, we produced Granola,
the only commercially available software that offered dramatic reduction
in computer power consumption within a hard performance constraint. We
extended this technological core to create an enterprise scale software
suite for managing the energy of IT resources. Unfortunately, in 2013
MiserWare shut down due to lack of funding.

Many years ago, I was a PhD student and a Cunningham Fellow at Virginia Tech, though I left the program to found MiserWare.
I graduated Magna Cum Laude from the University of South Carolina
in December 2008. I was a member of the SCAPE Lab from Fall 2004,
first at USC, then at Virginia Tech, prior to leaving in 2007.

In my spare time, I rock climb whenever weather and time permits; take
poor photographs; write, play, and record music; and do a whole bunch of
recreational math and programming.

## Professional Statement

My general interests lay with software entrepreneurship. Creating engaging products and
communicating their value to customers has never been easier or more
bootstrappable than it is right now. Since I was a kid, I have been
thrilled by computers and computing; combining that with the challenges
and thrills (not to mention the sometimes brutal economics) of a
business has been a fascinating path of discovery for me. Times aren’t
always easy, but they are rarely boring.

In my role at Mobile System 7, I am striving to discover the most
efficient way to create market fit within the bounds of high-tech,
resource intensive software development and often slow enterprise sales
cycles. I have been experimenting with ideas from [The Lean
Startup](http://theleanstartup.com/) and the [micro
ISV](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Micro_ISV) community, coupling the
fast feedback loops they recommend with lessons learned about enterprise
sales at MiserWare to rapidly improve not only our product but also our
sales process. 

In addition to my role in founding and helping shape Miserware, I
either was or led the engineering side of the company from its
inception, and this has given me the opportunity to work on more aspects
of software and computing than I can count. Roughly in chronological
order, and leaving out the small stuff: designing and implementing core
algorithms, designing software architectures, test-driven development,
interviewing and hiring, choosing and building a team, agile
development, project management, benchmarking, creating datacenter-scale
technologies, timeline and release management, creating user interfaces,
creating and facilitating cross-platform software, software maintenance
and updating, and creating a disruptive next-generation have all been on
my plate at one point or another. Being in the drivers seat for a nascent company is a
sure way to get your hands dirty with all kinds of different dirt.
