---
layout: post
title: "The Rules of Real Estate"
date: 2018-03-17
---
A couple years ago, I set out to teach myself about real estate
investing. I read some books ([this one](http://amzn.to/2Ep24ig) being
my favorite), talked to some  smarter and more experienced people, and
synthesized that information with my own experience and logic. And then
got after it. I bought myself a fixer-upper to live in, rented out my
condo, and bought a foreclosure (one of the dreaded [$30k
properties](https://www.biggerpockets.com/renewsblog/2015/08/22/truth-30k-investment-properties/))
to fix up and rent. Ultimately, my girlfriend got into grad school in
North Carolina and I ended up liquidating all three, so it wasn't the
slow-build, buy-and-hold investing I had set out to do. I ended up with
more tax liability than I would have planned for, but in the end I made
a tidy bit of money on each property.

I learned a ton along the way, but I think my (modest) success was more
a function of distilling the information I absorbed into a set of what
[Ray Dalio calls principles](http://amzn.to/2Ha0L4d): broadly applicable
concepts that generalize well to a number of situations. By
understanding and adhering to these principals, I was able to make money
from my properties, even without the long timeline I had originally
envisioned.

What follows are what I jokingly referred to as The Rules of Real
Estate. When my girlfriend and I began looking at houses to start our
journey, she would sometimes become enamored with a property or overly
excited. I would slap on a half-smile and refer her to one of the
"rules" she was violating. This banter contributed to my success, by
helping reinforce these rules in my mind. Because they came about this
way, they look a lot like a set of real estate-related [cognitive
biases](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cognitive_bias): stumbling blocks
we set up for ourselves in the evaluation of real estate deals.
Following these principles helps you avoid common mental pitfalls so
that you have a better chance of making money on any deal you do.

## The Rules of Real Estate
### Rule 1: Don't make decisions based on emotion
This rule is most often violated when looking at purchasing your own
home, and much of the real estate "machine" pushes you toward an
emotional decision. You tour properties with your agent. Maybe your
agent takes you to to a few beaters first, to show off some of the
"other inventory". You plod through each property, finding fault after
fault, and despair ever finding a home. Then you go to a property that
is well-updated, looks great, and smells like cookies, even if it is 15%
above what you wanted to pay. Your agent mentions that they've already
got other offers they're considering, or that she's shown this property
a lot and there's been a ton of interest. You go home and have a
discussion with your partner: there's not much left on the market right
now, and someone is sure to scoop this one up! Let's make an offer near
asking price to ensure we get it, ahead of the other offers. 

You've just made a decision based on emotion, and as a result you're
less likely to make money on the deal. Don't feel bad; it's really hard
not to, and it requires discipline and diligence on your part. As I said
above, many of the steps I just described prey on your human nature. The
long day of touring homes results in [decision
fatigue](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decision_fatigue). The dumpy
properties you looked at first activate the [contrast
effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contrast_effect), making the last
property look like a mansion, and the lack of inventory triggers a
[scarcity response](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scarcity_heuristic).
The sidenote about other offers triggers yet another scarcity heuristic,
this one about time: you need to get an offer in quick! All of these
factors trigger emotional responses, and put your mind in a state where
it is challenging to make the best decisions. 

Objectively, these emotional triggers are just that and little else.
There are ugly, overpriced, terrible properties in any market. There
will always be more inventory if you take your time to find a deal. And
your offer should always be an objective reflection of your efforts at
valuing the property yourself. So how do we put aside the inbuilt,
emotional responses and engage our logical brains? 

It turns out that we can't, really. The best we can do is to be informed
of our shortcomings, and to insist on structuring our choices in such a
way that we have time for logical reflection. The former can be
accomplished through books like [this one](http://amzn.to/2CzF2zu) or
[this one](http://amzn.to/2HqRYuV) (my personal favorite), or even blog
posts like the one you're reading. The latter can be accomplished by
carefully breaking each deal down in the same way, financially and
logically, while giving oneself some reasonable amount of time for
reflection. The time helps avoid the scarcity problems and the
methodical deal evaluation engages the logical parts of our mind,
helping to ensure we don't make decisions on emotion alone. After
evaluating enough deals like this, it becomes easier and we become more
resistant to the nefarious (intentional or not) traps laid for our
emotional mind.

### Rule 2: Don't count your chickens before they hatch

Deals fall through all the time, for all sorts of reasons. As humans, we
tend to [inordinately weight a loss relative to an equivalent
gain](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loss_aversion). This means that the
loss of a deal, particularly a deal in which we've invested ourselves
emotionally, loom large. Additionally, for a deal to have even been on
the table in the first place, we'd need to have made an investment, and
we perceive that investment as a [sunk
cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sunk_cost). Together, these factors
mean that we tend to go to lengths, sometimes inappropriate lengths, to
keep a dealt together. 

As an example, imagine you have a home inspection on a property. The
inspection uncovers some hidden issues, and you ask for changes. The
owner refuses to address the changes, and refuses to change the sale
price. Often, rather than lose the deal we've already invested time (and
maybe some money!) in, we make concessions and accept the property with
the uncovered warts to keep the deal together.

The problem comes when these concessions change the parameters of the
deal we've evaluated. If it was a good deal with no changes required,
and it is no longer a good deal with the changes you'd accept, then you
should walk away from the deal. More generally, **don't count your
chickens before they hatch**: assume the deal will fall through until
the day you get the title. This is true for both purchases and sales. 

By distancing yourself from the deal, and assuming the deal will fall
through, it becomes easier to objectively evaluate the situation as it
evolves, ultimately resulting in better decisions.

### Rule 3: There will always be another opportunity

This rule is a generalization of the two previous rules. It is a mindset
we should try to coach ourselves into, one that helps shield us from
emotional triggers and loss aversion: no matter what deal we are
currently evaluating, no matter how good it seems or how it evolves, it
is not the only opportunity out there. One of the implications of this
rule is that our mental time scales should reflect the reality of real
estate investing; in other words, many deals really only make sense in a
time scale measured in years, but we tend to evaluate any given deal as
though the inventory and opportunities we've looked at recently are all
there is. 

The reality is that **there will always be another opportunity**.
Patience, along with an appropriate mindset, means we get the best deals
not just for right now, but for the years to come and for our total
investment potential. In turn, this translates into a better
*portfolio*, which is a much better goal.

### Rule 4: You make your money when you buy, not when you sell

At this point, you've prepared yourself. You've got a great mindset,
you've shielded yourself emotionally, and you're aware of your loss
aversion. The previous rules have you in a position to objectively
evaluate your deals. To do so, however, you need to do do some homework
and build your knowledge base. 

One critical element is researching and internalizing deal evaluation
techniques, including rules of thumb (examples for buy-and-hold rental
properties: the [50%
rule](http://www.123flip.com/education/the-50-rule/) and the [2%
rule](https://www.biggerpockets.com/renewsblog/2013/04/14/the-2-percent-rule/)).
These rules vary considerably depending on what type of deal you're
looking for (rentals, flips, etc.). I suggest reading as many books as
you can find and finding a mentor who has done the type of investing
you're interested in.

Another element is understanding the market you're working in. This
means putting the legwork in to get a feel for neighborhoods, prices in
your area, the way property values are changing, and more. If you're
working with a realtor, they can offer some guidance on these elements,
but nothing beats hitting the streets yourself to understand
neighborhoods and how they're evolving. This is a time consuming
process, but it's critical to being able to objectively evaluate deals. 

If you're looking at un-renovated properties (and you probably are), and
especially distressed properties, you also need to start learning how to
make rough estimates for the costs of rehab. If you plan on doing some
of the work yourself, start educating yourself on how to do the types of
tasks you want to take on. You should also start getting references and
building relationships with local contractors. A good, reliable
contractor with a fair price can make the difference between a lucrative
deal and a break-even or money losing scenario.

Depending on the type of deal, there are probably also other elements
you need to educate yourself on. The point is, until you build your
knowledge base, you are not ready to objectively evaluate deals. Why is
this so important? Because **you make your money when you buy, not when
you sell**. In other words, the only way to reliably make money is to
buy properties that are objectively good deals. Do your homework, put in
the legwork, and find the deals that will be good regardless of what
happens in the market.

### Rule 5: Always do your diligence 

To stand the best chance of making your money when you buy, you need to
fully understand the property you are buying. This means having all
inspections necessary to uncover any hidden issues. The range of
inspections can vary from property to property, but at a minimum this
would include a home inspection, with follow up on any specific issues
uncovered. 

As an example, say you had a home inspection and the inspector noted
cracks in the foundation. In some cases, these cracks are not an issue,
but in others they can imply serious stress or even existing damage to a
foundation element. Rather than accepting the inspector report which
simply states that there are cracks, follow up with a licensed engineer
to get an evaluation of the foundation. At first, follow ups like this
can seem expensive, but the are far less expensive than finding out the
house needs foundation work *after* you buy it.

The output of this diligence should be a list of known issues with
reasonable estimates on the cost of and urgency of repair. This list
then serves as input to the model you build as part of your deal
evaluation. If you are planning to do some work on the property
yourself, you may want to address many of the issues uncovered yourself.
This doesn't mean you shouldn't get a reasonable estimate though: these
estimates help you determine the discount on the asking price you should
expect, and they provide leverage for your negotiation. In some states,
you can include an "inspection contingency" - a way to back out of the
contract if the inspection uncovers something you don't like. These
contingencies are a great way to apply leverage to the seller of the
home. They only work, though, if you're willing to do your diligence
every time.

### Rule 6: You can change anything about a property except its location

Issues uncovered in your inspection, ugly finishes, bad layouts, weird
construction techniques - these are all issues with remedies. A good
contractor can solve almost any problem with a property, though it may
not be cheap. The one thing no contractor can fix, though, is a problem
with the location. As a result, location should be the foremost concern
when evaluating a deal. 

If you've done your legwork, you should have a good general
understanding of the neighborhoods and areas in which you are looking.
Does the area have a lot of crime, or is it near such an area? Is there
a ton of noise from nearby airports, railroads, or highways? Are busy
streets dangerous for children living there? How are the schools in the
area, and which are the most sought after? Are there sidewalks
connecting the property to grocery stores, restaurants, bars, and other
amenities? Is it a reasonable walk? Are there bike lanes? Is there
public transit nearby? What service providers (internet, cable, etc.)
are available in the area? 

You should develop reasonable answers to all these questions as part of
your evaluation. The desirability of a property, whether for resale or
rental, is intimately tied to these factors, and so you should use them
as a way to evaluate a deal. It helps to make a checklist as you do your
evaluation to ensure you have good answers and don't overlook any
aspect. 

Another set of questions, though harder to answer, is about the future
of the location. Is there new construction nearby that will change the
property value? Is the area around the property being revamped? These
sorts of questions are most easily answered by either being or working
with an expert in the area. Realtors can fit this bill. Other area
investors who have been tapped in for some time are also great sources
of information. The future of a location, while not important to the
value of the property today, can mean the difference between a solid
rate of return and a huge home run.

To summarize, as part of your diligence, make sure you have a great
understanding of the location of the property. It is the one thing you
won't be able to change.

### Rule 7: Break the other rules only when it makes sense

Rigid rules are a great way to minimize risk when starting a new
venture. Like a poker player who only plays hands with [good
mathematical odds](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Poker_probability),
rules prevent you from large downside exposure based on the unknown.
However, the best poker players all use bluffing and other
nonmathematical elements to maximize their game. Similarly, to get the
best deals sometimes requires working outside these rules.

When does it make sense to break a rule? The answer is: when you have
enough information to make an informed, confident estimate to the
[expected value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Expected_value), and the
expected value far outstrips the cost. As with all expected value
calculations, the risk is inversely proportional to your confidence. As
you become more versed in deal evaluation and understanding of the risks
and costs associated with common problems, the better your confidence
can be in your estimate. 

As an example, if you were a licensed contractor, you could more
confidently make estimates of issues with the home that would be
uncovered by a home inspection. This would make it less risky to forgo
some of the diligence others might need to apply. However, because you
had not as thoroughly evaluated the home as you would otherwise, the
deal would need to be better to make up for the uncertainty. A more
extreme example are homes bought at "courthouse steps" auctions -
effectively sight unseen. To maximize the chances of making money on
such deals, we need to be confident that the price reflects the
uncertainty of a property that has not had any diligence performed.

One pitfall here is our own inability to estimate the true confidence of
our own opinions. In other words, we as humans [tend to overestimate our
own
competence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunning%E2%80%93Kruger_effect).
Keep this in mind as you look for those fantastic deals: you might not
know as much as you thought! In general, developing reliable estimates
of expected value isn't a task for beginners. For your first few deals,
strive to adhere to the previous rules to develop some intuition and
internalize the lessons. Once you're more confident, you can consider
breaking the rules, but only when it makes sense.

<hr>

These rules have served me well over the last years, but they are by no
means comprehensive. Instead, they're more like guideposts I use. If you
can follow them and ultimately incorporate them into your own thinking,
they are an effective way to improve the returns on your real estate
investments.

Did I miss any? Leave me a comment with your own rules for real estate
investment.
