# 2013 Roundup

This year has been a year of much growth for me, and though ultimately I
didn't complete all my goals, I did try a bunch of new stuff, some of
which I really liked.

## Goal review for 2013

  * __Lifting goals.__ With my primary climbing partner out of commision
    with a new son, at the beginning of this year I decided to try to
focus on some powerlifting goals to switch things up in the exercise
department. Having done (self-directed) Crossfit for a couple years
prior, I had a good foundation for the primary lifts I wanted to focus
on (squat, deadlift, press, clean, snatch), as well as having a decent
base to start from. 
    
    My lifting buddy and I set out on the road to swoleness with a copy
of Starting Strength, the best place to start as far as I can tell. My
lifts immediately started progressing, and I became more confident in my
form. The most surprising thing to me was the effect of diet on lifting.
If you want to get stronger, really a lot stronger, __eat as much as you
possibly can!__ For me, that meant trying the GOMAD thing, which,
incidentally, really works.

    Ultimately, it's all about the numbers. In 3 months of the
'beginner' programming from SS, my lifts went:
      * __Squat__: 295 -> 320
      * __Deadlift__: 295 -> 345
      * __Press__: 145 -> 155
      * __Clean and jerk__: 205 -> 225
      * __Snatch__: 165 -> 185
    While not quite hitting the 2X bodyweight goals I had for myself, I
felt good about the gains.

  * __Reading.__ I set out to read 50 books in 2013, and as of today I
    have less than 100 pages left in the 50th. So close. I read some
really excellent works though, both fiction and nonfiction, as well as
exploring graphic novels a bit. Some favorites are:
      * A Canticle for Leibowitz - Walter Miller, Jr.
      * Feeding the World - Vaclav Smil
      * The Notebook, The Proof, and The Third Lie by Agota Kristof
      * Everything ever written by Milan Kundera

  * __Get my spending way down.__ Late last year I started reading Mr.
    Money Mustache, and the whole 'eschew materialism in favor of doing
things you love to do' concept stuck with me. I spent the first part of
this year getting my spending in check, and at this point I am spending
between $1,000 and $1,200 a month, with my yearly costs factored in.
This is a far cry from where I started, and I must say it feels very
liberating to acquire almost nothing. 
    
    Additionally, I decided that many of my things that I already had
were nonessential, so I purged hundreds of books, DVDs, musical
instruments, kitchen gadgets, and other "stuff" from my life.

    On the other hand, I __did__ acquire something big in 2013: another
home. Specifically, I bought a small condo within walking distance to
town, and I love it. I burn maybe 1/4 tank of gas per month, and that is
almost all in climbing travel. Additionally, I got a good deal on it,
and while it is tying up a good bit of my capital, it has lowered my
monthly burn rate significantly.

  * __Improve my knowledge of web software and deployment.__ This was a
    resounding success. I rolled out several side projects this year,
each of which taught me many things. Web servers, datastores, security, queueing,
infrastructure automation tools, and more.

  * __Take on a social good project.__ I worked with my friends over at
    Maryland Nonprofits to help create a spacefinder for nonprofits,
focused on low-cost sublets. This tool promises to help nonprofits in
the Maryland area find homes for themselves so they can focus on their
actual missions. This isn't quite finished yet, but it is nearing
release, and I am excited to see where this goes.

  * __Climbing__. After my stint lifting (and brief forays into Olympic
    lifting and Crossfit Football), I decided to get back into climbing
after all. My original goal was to boulder V6 outdoors, and while I
haven't quite crushed it yet, it is on the near horizon. The last time I
went out before the end of the year, I climbed three V5 boulder
problems.

  * __Travel__. This goal is always on my list. This year, I was lucky
    enough to have time to take an 18-day road trip with one of my
closest friends. From Virgina, we drove north to Chicago and beyond,
ultimately taking highway 2 most of the way across the northern part of
the country. Along the way, I saw and met some excellent people, I got
to do the greatest hike I've ever done, I saw tons of wildlife, I got to
see my sister, and I got to see the City Museum in St. Louis, which was
the sleeper hit for the trip as far as I'm concerned. While 18 days
isn't as much as I would like, all in all it was still an excellent
trip.

  * __Create some cool side projects__. Like traveling, this is a
    "forever" goal. This year I released my first "major" side project,
[Silvi](http://getsilvi.com), aimed at improving institutional (and
personal) documentation. I also toyed with
[YellowCap](http://yellowcapsoftware.com) after talking to my mother, a
landscape professional, about one of the problems she has in her
business: keeping clients up to date in the face of changing situations
(backordered plants, weather, etc.). Lately, I've been working on
[Photobooth Creator](http://photoboothcreator.com), a spin-off of an
afternoon hacking project to put together an HTML5 photobooth for the
[MiserWare](http://miserware.com) holiday party. Additionally, I've done
myriad other smallish projects, ranging from games to libraries. You can
find most of them on my [Github page](http://github.com/josephturnerjr).

    Along the way, I've grown quite a bit as a developer. Deployment
methodologies, integrations with other systems, new languages, and
improving old ones have all made my fu much tighter.

## New goals for the new year

Based on the amount of flux in my life at the moment, 2014 promises to
be an exciting year. Here are, as of now, the goals I have for the
upcoming year.

  * __Make $500 on a personal project__. Word on the street is that the
    first $500 is the hardest.

  * __Get Lasik__. Thanks to an incredibly generous gift from
    [my](http://inletelectronics.com)
[parents](http://creativelandscapesinc.net), I will be getting my eyes
did on January 28th. I am excite!

  * __Work on a project with [Chris
    Poirel](http://www.chrispoirel.com/).__ Chris is an old friend, and
a genius to boot. I don't know if he'll have time with his new job, but
I'd love to work on something with him this year.

  * __Read 25 challenging books.__ Both nonfiction and fiction, and I
    expect to read several less challenging books as well. Along the way
I'd like to __read A New Kind Of Science.__ Stephen Wolfram fascinates.

  * __Boulder V6 outdoors.__ Carry-over from last year. The psych is
    high though, so should be an early one to knock out.

  * __Write and record five songs.__ I've tried this one before, and I
    have trouble sitting down and actually doing it. We'll see.

  * __Learn to fish.__ I feel like this is almost a birthright.

  * __Kill, clean, and eat an animal.__ As a meat eater, I feel like if
    I can't do this then I don't deserve to eat animal flesh.

  * __Become conversation in Spanish.__ Just started Rosetta Stone. This
    is something I've wanted to do for some time.

  * __Build a major(ish) project in a functional language.__ Functional
    languages seem awesome to me, and I use functional features of many
of my favorite languages, but I've never built anything serious in a
pure functional language. UNTIL NOW.

  * __Travel.__ I've already got a trip lined up to India to speak at
    the NAE IAFOE symposium in May. I'd also like to take a big
destination climbing trip. Again, a "forever" goal.

  * __Create some cool side projects.__ I'm foreseeing a genetic
    programming framework for Clojure (with the comments in Spanish!). I
usually just follow my interests for side projects, so we'll see.


